# Single-Cell RNA-seq analysis with CellRanger :crystal_ball:

Cell Ranger is a set of analysis pipelines that process Chromium single-cell RNA-seq output to align reads, generate feature-barcode matrices and perform clustering and gene expression analysis. Cell Ranger includes four pipelines relevant to single-cell gene expression experiments:

* **cellranger mkfastq** demultiplexes raw base call (BCL) files generated by Illumina sequencers into FASTQ files. 

* **cellranger count** takes FASTQ files and performs alignment, filtering, barcode counting, and UMI counting. It uses the Chromium cellular barcodes to generate feature-barcode matrices, determine clusters, and perform gene expression analysis.

* **cellranger aggr** aggregates outputs from multiple runs of `cellranger count`, normalizing those runs to the same sequencing depth and then recomputing the feature-barcode matrices and analysis on the combined data. The `aggr` pipeline can be used to combine data from multiple samples.

* **cellranger reanalyze** reruns the dimensionality reduction, clustering, and gene expression algorithms using tunable parameter settings.

## Workflows
If you are beginning with raw base call (BCL) files, the Cell Ranger workflow starts with demultiplexing the BCL files for each flowcell directory with `cellranger mkfastq`. If you are beginning with FASTQ files that have already been demultiplexed, you can jump right to `cellranger count`.

The exact steps of the workflow vary depending on how many samples, GEM wells, and flowcells you have. This section describes the different possible workflows.
